You're a pizza fanatic. You love it so
much that you decide to eat pizza every
single meal of every single day for the
rest of your life. Like you are
committed to subsisting on pizza.
>> Committed to the carbs.
>> Exactly. So Joe, you made that decision.
You come to me and you say, "Hey Dan,
I'm going to eat pizza for every meal of
my entire life. How about you open a
pizza restaurant for me to eat it?
[laughter]
Here's how we're going to fund it. 10%
equity. The bank is going to give you
90% of the funding in leverage. And it's
Dan's restaurant. Now, Tracy, Joe comes
to you [laughter]
for a personal loan
>> to fund his lifestyle,
>> his pizza eating lifestyle.
>> Tracy trusted me. She would lend it to
me.
>> Well, here's the question, right? Should
you, Tracy, consider the 90% levered
pizza restaurant that Joe is eating at
for all his meals. Now, on the one hand,
it's not Joe's loan,
>> right? So, he's not on the hook if the
pizza restaurant goes under. on the
other hand, it's Joe's only source of
food,
>> which is
>> Joe will die without the restaurant,
[snorts]
>> which is his he's committed to the
restaurant and it kind of makes the
restaurant intertwined with Joe's
ability to pay your personal loan back.
So, I guess that's the question.
>> No, that's great. So, now who's now that
let's take it out of pizza. Who is
>> So, that's whatever like Okay, now who
is the chips buy or whatever?
>> This is essentially what's happening
with offbalance sheet financing and data
center deals.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, there are just so many credit
related things to talk about right now.
All things credit.
>> I love it. I love it. Credit is
interesting. Again,
>> this might be one of the only credit
episodes that we've ever done where like
I found the guest because I feel like
when I think about like a credit all the
credit episodes, it's usually like
someone you know and randomly I found
someone who knows a little bit.
something about credit. She was like,
"Oh, let me do it. Let me
>> The stakes are high, Joe.
>> Let me I know. I was thinking about that
because you're like, "Oh, Joe, you like
picked someone who like doesn't know
anything." [laughter] No, I don't think
that I think we have a very
knowledgeable credit guest, but I'm a
little stressed about this aspect.
>> I believe in you, Joe. I trust your
judgment. [laughter] But to your point,
there's a lot going on. So, obviously,
uh there are concerns around private
credit. We've had some idiosyncratic
defaults and uh frauds in the market,
and each one is special in their own
way. But I think the worrying aspect is
that they keep coming to light, right?
Um, and so you've seen people like Jamie
Diamond using the cockroach analogy
which is now famous.
>> And at the same time,
>> you have the connection with AI, right?
Which we have spoken about a little bit
on the podcast with Paul Kadski. All
these complex circular financing
structures that are driving a lot of the
credit boom or have been driving a lot
of the credit boom. And then at the same
time, you also have the impact of AI on
credit itself.
>> Yeah, that's right. Because in theory,
right, like we've talked about this, we
did that episode with Joel Worheimr that
was in a slightly different context. Um,
but we've done these episodes about, you
know, just the incredible length of deal
text, etc. And perhaps if there's one
area where maybe we could say with some
high degree of confidence that large
language models could be useful, it is
can we break down this you know
multiundpage agreement so that we don't
have to have you know junior associates
or junior lawyers or junior bankers up
till 4 in the morning making sure that
every comma is in the right place etc.
In theory this could be an area in which
AI could be productively uh applied. You
know, there was an actual case argued
over a comma.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> I can't remember exactly what it was,
but like you're absolutely right. The
grammar, the specific words clearly
matter in legal language. I would just
add one of the things that's been
driving arguably driving private credit
is the boom in creditor on creditor
violence in public deals. So, it was
this idea that you could avoid that by
having, you know, this private close
relationship with your borrower where
you are higher up in the waterfall of
payment. Um, so this is important.
>> It would be really nice if you could
upload a credit agreement to Chad GPT
and just say, "Make sure there's nothing
in here that would get me in trouble.
Make sure there's nothing in here that
would uh, you know, that 5 years later I
will regret the placement of a certain
>> make sure I don't lose money.
>> Make sure I don't lose money in some
technical way." Anyway, so there's just
a lot going on. I feel like we there's
plenty of episodes to do on this. Uh,
but we really do have the perfect guest.
someone who literally sort of sits in
the intersection of I think we
identified three distinct trends. Here
we are going to be speaking with Dan
Wartman. He is the co-founder of a
company called uh Noetica AI and it does
exactly this. It sort of attempts to use
AI to understand credit. So he has a lot
of understanding about deals and the
text in them but he also just has a lot
of understanding about AI etc. So can
talk about all these things. Dan, thank
you so much for uh coming on the
podcast.
>> Thanks so much for having me. I'm a fan
of the show. love to hear it.
>> You guys are kind of like celebrities
for me. So, [laughter]
it's uh it's kind of fitting that I'm
here because
uh folks I'm here at least with folks at
Bloomberg because many people think
about us at Noetica like the Bloomberg
for deal terms.
>> Okay. Well, let's see. Let's see if uh
you actually live up to that. No, but um
so since I said I'm stressed that Oh,
this time we're doing a credit episode
and I found the guest. Um can you give
us your give us the quick version of
like your career and what Noetica is?
>> Yeah. So uh let's start with Noetica.
What we build at Noetica is AI powered
software for benchmarking real-time data
on what's market in credit M&A capital
markets deal terms.
>> Okay. So set another way, we help folks
like transactional attorneys, credit
managers, bankers, we help them figure
out whether the terms of their
transactional agreements like think
financing agreements, merger agreements,
perspectuses
and really all other corporate
transactions are on or off market by
benchmarking them to market comps. So as
far as the genesis of Netica, it was
kind of born out of my own experience uh
in my career. So I started my career at
Black Rockck. I was on a team
responsible for coming up with new
financial products and fixed markets and
we were developing these new interesting
innovative structured products and I
just learned a ton about the capital
markets ecosystem and in particular just
this is a $50 trillion global market.
>> Yeah.
>> And it runs on phone calls and
relationships and it's unbelievably
antiquated. Then fast forward I went
back to get my GD. I joined Wat Lipton
where I did corporate transactions. This
was 2017 to 2022. So if you guys
remember that time, it was heyday of
merger activity, right?
>> So I worked on, you know, T-Mobile's Bio
Sprint, the biggest $30 billion
commitment at the time, Alan Avi, UTC,
Rathon, and I distinctly remember I was
sitting down at my desk. I was looking
at a transaction group in a
multi-billion dollar merger. And I was
looking at a term, and I was trying to
figure out whether I should help my
client accept term A or term B in this
context. and I was stuck. So I called a
senior partner on the deal. I said,
'Hey, where's the database of
information where I could see exactly
how this term should come out and
quantify it for my client and you know
the answer was that doesn't exist.
>> Now that was you know two and a half
plus years ago now I left to start
noetica with a fairly simple idea which
is AI enables us to finally quantify
what market agreement terms should look
like in these markets. Um, you know, now
we work with almost all the top 20 law
firms on the street. We're helping them
advise their clients on these deals.
[snorts] And this year we're on track to
do about a trillion dollars of
transactions through the platform.
>> Wow.
>> And you get 1% of that. So that's great.
[laughter] You're
>> Well, talk to us about um what these
financing agreements actually look like
and how traditionally they're sort of
judged by both the investors and the
lawyers who are looking at them.
>> Yeah. I mean, so when I say deal terms,
what I mean is deal terms are really the
underpinning of the entire transactional
system, the rules of the road. You could
think about them like speed limits,
double yellow lines, street lights.
They're kind of the plumbing that goes
into the transactions. Um, putting in a
way that people can understand. Imagine
I go sign a lease.
>> Mhm.
>> Most people are very familiar with
certain things, right? like the rent
price, the how long the lease is,
>> subleting policy.
>> Exactly. But if deep in that 20page
lease, the lease says if the weather
gets under 30° at any time you forfeit
your right to the apartment, well,
that's a deal term and that affects
whether you want to accept that lease or
not. Um, and so it's the same in capital
markets terms. Um, to give you a more
tangible example, yeah. Um,
you know, are are you guys fast food
people?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. So, I'm like a McDonald's guy and
whenever I go to McDonald's, I always
order the 10 piece chicken McNugget. And
there's I've I've ordered the 10 piece
hundreds of times. Um,
>> there's exactly three things that happen
when you order a 10 piece. You open the
box, you have nine pieces.
>> Yeah.
>> You open the box, you have exactly 10
pieces. Or you open the box and you have
11 pieces. Now, if you have nine pieces,
you go to the counter, you say, "Hey,
I'm missing a piece." They give you a
piece. You get the benefit of your
bargain. If you get 10, you you enjoy
your McNuggets. If you get 11, what do
you do?
>> You stay quiet. [laughter]
>> Exactly. So, you hit the jackpot. Right.
Now, there's this kind of unwritten rule
in American consumerism, which is that
if a company that's bigger than you
gives you something by accident, then
you get the benefit of that as a
consumer. Well, in 2020,
the exact kind of thing happened in the
credit markets. Uh, but it ended very
differently. City Bank sent $900 million
to lenders
>> in full prepayment of a loan for Revlon
and they did so accidentally. Now, they
were supposed to just send an interest
payment.
>> At the time, the terms of the credit
agreement
>> were silent. The governing documentation
associated with this loan didn't say
what happens in that scenario. Long
story short, many funds did not get back
that hundreds of millions of dollars and
litigation ensued. But a deal term in
credit deals called erroneous payment
deal terms started popping up in the
market.
>> Noica's data last clocked that deal term
as of last quarter, 90% of deals. So if
you don't have that term now in your
deal, you're way off market in terms of
the way the market actually operates.
This is why deal terms is important.
These are hundreds of millions of
dollars at stake in the context of all
these deals.
>> There there's something very lawyerly
about like I have to say I've never
counted the McNuggets. I just get it and
I so just I would this example would
have never occurred to me because I'm
not the type of person that opens a box
of McNuggets and starts
>> clearly you don't value McNuggets
enough.
>> Evidently uh evidently not. What are
some other deal terms? So that's a great
example that okay now after that
incident which was infamous um language
about this started popping up. What are
some other sort of classic and I'm sure
they get much much more esoteric than
that, but what are some other like key
interesting deal terms that trend over
time?
>> Yeah, so um it's really interesting. So
there's a whole host of what I would
call structural protections in a lot of
these deals. Uh these come in a lot of
different flavors. Many people talk
about them as things like antipets smart
terms, things like J Crew blockers,
things like certain protections. Let's
talk about some of these.
>> Yeah, let's talk about some of these.
So, you know, anti petsmart terms, these
are protections that prevent guarantor
releases when subsidiaries of the credit
group become non-holy owned. In other
words, it prevents value from being
transferred away from the loan into some
other
>> structure which doesn't provide credit
support. Let me put this in a way that
most people don't understand. If you
were getting a mortgage on your house,
>> um, pretty simple framework. you take
out the debt, you pay your mortgage
payments, you pay back the loan. Uh bank
can foreclose on your house if you stop
paying a mortgage. But in the mortgage,
if it said something like, well, if you
sell any part of your home, front door,
a window, a shingle,
>> the bank loses the ability to foreclose
on that house fully. Well, then what
would you do? You would sell a single
shingle.
>> You would stop payer mortgage and you
get to keep your house and you get the
benefit of that. That's what
antipetssmart terms actually prevent.
They prevent the ability for credit
groups to actually sell a single equity
and actually lose the credit support
from that particular equity. [snorts]
So, it's kind of interesting what we're
seeing in the market right now. We have
this really unique vantage point from
the point of view of our software where
we quantify trends in deal terms over
time. And so we can actually very
precisely tell you the percentages of
deals that are actually getting a lot of
these structural protections and
actually gives us this really unique
window into the into the anxieties and
the optimisms that are currently
happening in the market. Um some people
think about this as kind of an early
signal of something likely to come. Um
so what are we seeing? Well, we're
calling it a flight to fortification.
Um and it's really happening on both
issuers and borrowers. And I'll explain
what I mean. We're seeing massive
increases in lenders getting structural
protections in these deals. Basically,
these are protections that help make
sure their collateral is locked. Um
things like the antipetmart terms and
we'll talk about a bunch a few more. In
return, borrowers are getting the same
fortification. In fact, they're getting
more economic flexibility
in and you could think about it as a way
for them to weather the storm is how
we're seeing it. So things like adbacks
to IBIDA, you know, more ability to send
money to shareholders, more ability to
make long-term investments. Let's talk
about the actual specifics of what we're
seeing. Anti petter terms, the one I
just talked about,
>> we clocked that at 28% of deals in Q3.
That was at 4% in 2023. It was and Q2
was at 25%. This is the highest we've
ever recorded that term. J Crew
blockers, which prevent issuers from
moving material IP outside the credit
group, that's at 45% of deals now. The
baseline from 2023 15% and last quarter
it was 38%. Anti-serta [snorts]
protections which are lean subordination
protections they actually help secure
your place in line if and when some sort
of distress activity happens. That's at
84% of deals. That's the highest jump
we've ever seen quarter quarter. It went
up from 61%. It's a 23 point jump. Uh
and the baseline is 39% in 2023.
That's pretty significant for a
quarterly jump. And it really signals
something about the market. On the
quantitative side, we track a lot of
stuff too, including the ratios under
which borrowers need to maintain
specific types of leverage. We saw that
at 3.9 times IBIDA uh in Q2 and it went
down to three and a half times. But
again, that's signaling some sort of
anxiety among the lender group that uh
that we would normally see. Now, you may
ask, what are borrowers getting for
this?
again they're getting more
fortification.
Uh one of the ways this is coming up is
in IBIDA ABEX. Uh are you all familiar
with IBIDA?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> So IBBA Abback basically there's a very
long and complicated calculation of cash
flow in a lot of these deals and the
ABbacks to IBIDA basically allow
borrowers and issuers to add back
certain things to count them as cash
flow
>> to flatter their balance sheet
basically.
>> Correct. [laughter] Correct. Uh, one of
the more interesting adbacks that we
track is what's called a cost savings
adback. So, imagine a borrower knows
it's going to optimize some cost in the
future. If it can reasonably predict
that cost, it can add that back to
today's cash flow. Uh, that cost savings
back, whether it materializes or not,
>> uh, is added back to today's cash flow.
64% of deals now have cost savings
adbacks in them. That's the highest
we've ever recorded. 20% uh for deals
with uh those adbacks being above 20% of
IBIDA that came in at 51% which is also
the highest we've ever tracked uh on the
platform.
>> Um they're also getting things like
excluding lenders that are short in
their debt. Um so for instance uh folks
may be familiar with what happened with
the Windstream case uh a few years ago.
Um what happened in that case is certain
hedge funds were actually
short the debt the the loan that was in
default and that makes them uh not
exactly aligned
>> with the company that has the debt
outstanding. uh terms started popping up
in the market which we've tracked which
are called net short lender terms which
allow borrowers to exclude those lenders
from voting that is now in 13% of deals
which is the highest we've ever tracked
so you can see the fortification
actually on both sides of the market and
it really signals I think to us that
there's a risk allocation happening uh
with a lot of these these anxieties
>> so Joe first of all you know my husband
was a corporate lawyer at one point yes
>> okay so one of the things he's most
proud of is he came come up with some
language in a deal shortly after the
2008 financial crisis and it was he sent
it to me just now a significant
dislocation in financial markets.
>> That was him and that became like
standard language in risk factors at
least in a bunch of deals. That's his
contribution.
>> I'm the inventor of this deal with so
and so and so and so the inventor. Some
people invent great medicine. Some
people invent some new technology and
someone invents a new deal term that
gets propagated across right documents
for years there on after.
>> That's how it works. But Dan, I wanted
to ask you something. Okay, so you say
there's more fortification in a lot of
deal terms um more protections perhaps
for both investors and lenders. I guess
one of the things we heard, you know,
prior to 2020 and then for some years
after it was we had this explosion in
covite deals, right? fewer protections
for investors because everyone was so
desperate supposedly for yield for that
particular paper. So the balance of
power shifted to the borrowers. They
were able to dictate the terms. How are
investors getting better protections now
with you know credit spreads still at
basically multi-deade lows which
suggests that there's still a lot of
demand and that they don't hold all the
power in the market.
>> Yeah. I I I think about it and what the
data supports uh that we see on the
platform is I think about it less so as
what they're getting but more about what
the terms actually reflect in terms of
the macro environment that they're
operating in. So for instance right now
we're seeing this flight to
fortification in part largely due to
probably a few things. Number one being
you some of these headline risks that
folks have been talking about. We I'm
sure we'll get into some of what's going
on in the private credit market today.
So people flooding into more structural
protections because they're worried
about their place in line if there is
distress. I think number two is just
macro- wise if you think about it in the
credit markets there was a ton of debt
taken out in 2020 2021 2020 early part
of 2022 um this leads to a lot of
maturity walls upcoming uh especially in
>> we don't say upcoming on the show we say
looming
>> looming looming yeah exactly uh there
are a lot of looming maturity walls uh
in 2028 2029 vintage and you could think
about it as well that's a macro factor
that people are thinking about when they
uh when they underwrite a loan because
many of these deals actually have
fiveyear tenor, you know, sevenyear
tenor, eight year tener, in some cases
30-year tenor. And so they're thinking
about all these protections in the
context of that market. I also think
it's really interesting aside from the
credit context right now, we're seeing a
lot of structuring in terms happening in
M&A markets. So, you know, things like
regulatory uncertainty, things like
tariffs, uh things like uh uh uh you
know, uh liability management, as we
talked about, things like t tax
uncertainty. I'm happy to go into these,
but we're seeing a lot of things in this
area. You know, one kind of small
example of this in situations where a
buyer and a seller have regulatory
uncertainty, which you know, a lot of
folks think about the administration and
they're not sure exactly how things are
how things are going to play out. Um,
you actually see regulatory review in
deals get hyperfocused on
>> and it actually precipitated a new deal
term this year which we tracked in the
market. We had anomalous term detection
of the platform. when we sent out a note
to all of our clients uh and it's called
a new outside date structure term.
Basically what it does is it allows
buyers of
um of a of uh acquiries. It allows them
to lock in their financing for longer
and actually extend their financing um
in the case scenario where regulatory
review lacks. And that's just an example
of the kind of innovation that's
happening in the merger uh markets.
terms of tariffs, we picked up the first
tariff event of default in a credit deal
ever.
>> It happened in a Superior Industries
deal over the summer, uh, which probably
is unsurprising to you as an auto
manufacturer deal that made a lot of
parts in Mexico.
>> Um, that's now in 5% of M&A deals. Wow.
>> Uh, for for tariff based M&A carveouts
and material out of respect clauses. Can
we talk a little bit about um you know
you're scanning these documents you know
Google's engram has existed for a long
time tracking the pre the prevalence of
a tren of a term is not novel technology
>> yeah control F exist
>> right control F yeah that's this is sort
of like very it barely even counts as
technology at that point what is it that
you you know when you're talking about
the changing prevalence of these terms
what is the actual novelty here that
isn't just sort of yeah document search
over time.
>> Yeah. So Tracy, your your husband's a a
former corporate lawyer. Uh you know, he
would tell you
>> covering corporate lawyer.
>> Recovering corporate lawyer. Exactly. I
am myself as well. One of the things he
would tell you is that there's constant
innovation in these [clears throat]
markets. These agreements are highly
complicated. They're very long. They
have a lot of what's called long range
dependencies which is that some you may
be used to seeing something in a
particular area of the document said one
way but in reality it turns out it's
punted to three different causes deep
down and you actually have to go find
that information. This is why
>> it's also jiu-jitsu between the
borrowers and the lenders, right?
Because like the borrowers are often
trying to hide something that's
favorable to them or the lenders are
trying to hide something favorable to
them. So the structure and the way it's
worded changes a lot to your point.
>> Exactly. And these are sophisticated
parties paying millions, sometimes
hundreds of millions of dollars in
advisory fees to make sure that these
terms look the way they do. Now that
leads to kind of the technological
innovation that I think has enabled a
lot of this. AI for the first time can
attribute in particular new language
models can attribute more semantic
meaning to phrases and language that was
impossible with things like engrams. And
so um what Noetica does is it uses a
series of language models including a
multi-layered information extraction
system to make sure that it's encoding
all the semantic meaning inside all
these terms so that when you look at a J
crew blocker in the first way it may be
phrased a thousand different different
ways but we can track that term over
time. Um that has enabled the ability to
actually quantify for the first time
what a market agreement term looks like
in these markets. Um, and I think that's
why uh it's so interesting to folks on
the platform.
>> So, I know you're not doing litigation,
but I I guess I'm curious how you deal
with or if AI is helpful with in
litigation what would be called
precedent, but I'm assuming you're
building up a big database of all these
different deal documents. Is it useful?
Is AI useful to go back and look at
previous documents in order to shape new
ones? [snorts]
>> Yeah, exactly. So at at Noetica we are
ultimately an AF powered software
company but we actually have the largest
knowledge graph of deal terms in
existence. So Tracy exactly what you
said it's a database ultimately of
precedent comparable deal terms and that
database this is going to be
mind-blowing but has over a billion
terms in it. So digital alert is in
existence we map that back to deal
characteristics. It's the same in
litigation right? So in transactional
markets um you know folks are innovative
but they also want to rely on something
that has happened before or at least in
part they want to rely on something that
has happened before and so folks are
constantly looking for ways to tie
things back to comparable deal terms.
It's the same in litigation. So
obviously not my expertise but the same
concept which is you know when you write
a brief you're constantly citing cases
that the judge has you know relied on in
the past and you know for lawyers and
you know outside of lawyers even just
deal professionals generally bankers
credit managers um people are highly
reliant on Present
>> what is your tech stack are did you is
it what do you build and how much is it
like oh you're using chatgpt's API etc.
like okay yes large large language
models are good at identifying deal
terms or novelty etc there's semantic
meaning of these terms but what did you
actually build and what do you actually
employ in your technology
>> so we uh were started in 2022 so we're
what you would call AI native and we
were started in a system that already
language models existed in um however we
because of the nature of the sensitive
documents and terms that we deal with
especially for you know major law firms
financial in
>> this is like a big issue with them right
that they don't want to just be
uploading their stuff to chat GPT right
>> exactly and so we actually utilize you
know adopted language models open source
language models that we adopt on our own
proprietary data sets and then deploy in
secure environments and single tenant
architectures you know for individual
instances of institutions that deploy
our product and so you could think about
it as based on the language models that
you know are ultimately underpinning a
lot of the GPDs and the clouds.
>> Um, however, it's fine-tuned to this
particular data set which makes it
obviously much better at handling this
exact problem. Um, which is a big
problem in the market. Um, now we also
layer on top of that information
extraction model. So for instance, uh
you may know that a term exists in what
deal, but um you may want to know what
terms should exist for a JP Morgan deal
or for a BFA deal or for you know a
particular type of counterparty. And so
in those context we actually want to map
those deal terms back to deal
characteristics and we actually utilize
a lot of models to extract information
and marry that with thirdparty data
sets. So that's a little bit about how
the technology works. I think I always
think about it from the user standpoint.
What does the user really want? The user
really wants to know how they're going
to advise their client on a particular
merger, on a particular credit deal. Uh
how often does this come up? You always
call your attorney and you're trying to
figure out is this market, is it
offmarket? And that's what our data
provides.
>> Okay. So structural fortifications in
deal terms. What are you seeing right
now? Because as we started this
conversation, we were talking a lot
about the recent blowups in the private
credit market. And if you look at um you
know some spreads on certain firms,
certain bonds, it does seem like
nervousness is creeping back into the
market. I see spreads on you know it's
not private credit but spreads on uh
triple C rated debt have been creeping
up recently. How scared or concerned are
people right now? Well, I uh I recently
um wrote about this in the Wall Street
Journal a little bit and then, you know,
folks contacted me and it kind of said,
you know, you're causing a stir
[laughter]
>> and uh and then I saw Howard Marks came
out with his letter uh which I think was
called Cockroaches in the Coal Mine
>> and it had a lot of the same themes. I
think folks who have been around credit
market for a very long time can can kind
of see what's a little bit of what's
going on. Um to us, let me just talk
about what the data supports. To us,
what we see is creditors may be
preparing
this system, their system for distress.
>> Okay?
>> And I'll talk about what we're seeing in
the data that kind of supports that. But
um you could think about it like the
evolution of
your house security, right? So, you
know, first you lock the doors, then you
know, you get a bolt lock, then which
gives you better protection, you know,
then you, you know, you add a security
system on top of that, an alarm system.
And at the end, what do you do? You kind
of count up all your valuables and you
ensure them [gasps]
>> if people are going to get into the
house. And, you know, for the fast past
few years, we've seen lenders really
focus on keeping people out. This is the
locks and the deadbolt. And this is what
we were talking about with Jay Crew
blockers. This is making sure you can't
structure around me from a liability
management perspective. But over the
last quarter, something kind of changed,
which is we started seeing people and
lenders obsessed with lean subordination
terms.
>> Um, which is the term that governs who
gets paid first when everything falls
apart.
>> So, this isn't really about preventing
liability management exercises that
much. It's it's actually about
controlling the recovery when a
bankruptcy does happen. Uh and and so we
clock that term at 84% of deals in Q3.
Biggest quarterly jump we've ever seen
>> from uh from uh from the prior quarter.
It's also the highest we've ever clocked
that term. So this begs the question of
why
>> why are creditors so focused on making
sure their place in line is
>> in recovery
>> in recovery is the same.
Perhaps it's a reaction to the liability
management transactions we've talked
about.
>> So perhaps folks are thinking that that
will precipitate. Perhaps it's a
reaction to some of the maturity walls
that folks understand or perhaps it's
some of what I was saying in the oped
which is folks are seeing that there may
be distress events on the horizon and
they want to make sure that if there is
uh they have the most negotiating
leverage as possible. So I know it's
broad statements but you know when we
look at the sort of environment under
which companies like first brands or
treeor or some of these other ones that
have gone into distress very rapidly
when we look back at when these were
birthed etc. Can we say like there was
um these were sloppy times. These were
loose sloppy times that um people were
not thinking much about either just
quality due diligence or diligent uh
terms.
>> Yeah. So I think with First Brands is a
great example, right? So First Brands is
an automotive replacement company,
right? So they they make things like
brakes and white wipers and filtration
systems. Beginning in 2019, that company
effectively
rapidly expanded through debtfueled
acquisitions. Uh, and it dramatically
increased its scale. Um, but I think
what First Brands illustrates is
something that, you know, we might get
into with the private credit markets,
which is that, you know, they primarily
funded these acquisitions with large
debt facilities. Then tariffs hit in
April of 2025 which obviously changed
their business because they actually do
a lot of manufacturing and that kind of
magnified problems. So you can think
about one of the main problems with
first brands which is also kind of some
of what folks are worried about in the
private credit markets today is what's
called offbalance sheet financing. What
first Brands used is a lot of kind of,
you know, receivables, financing
facilities that weren't properly
disclosed to a lot of folks that were
lending to the company. In fact, I think
in that sense, just to give you a sense
of quantum, this is over 11 billion of
total obligations that they had when
they actually uh started disclosing it
in terms of offbalance sheet financing.
And, you know, they were disclosing
things like five to six billion dollars
of actual uh debt obligations. And so
this led one of the creditor lawyers to
say that $2.3 billion just disappeared.
And so that structure, the ability for
first prince to get that debt was made
possible by the private credit markets
and how deep the private credit markets
have become. Because if you're a big
credit manager in private credit
markets, you could fund, you know, that
type of receivable facility to a first
brands and first brands could use that
facility to then, you know, make sure
they are constantly uh continuing to
acquire new businesses and and keep
rolling over the the the cash.
I have a theory that uh receivables,
financing, and factoring is to the
private credit market what um French
quants who went to that one really elite
school
>> I like this
>> are to uh to trading blowups.
>> I like that theory.
>> Yeah. So the other thing we wanted to
ask you about and again we referenced
this in the intro is we are seeing these
really complicated deals that I
admittedly cannot keep track of in the
AI market where you know one company is
going to buy chips from this other
company and then that company is going
to borrow from whoever and use the chips
funding to pay them back and then that
money somehow goes into the company that
is buying the stuff in the first place.
It is all very circular, all very
incestuous in many ways. Um, in my mind,
how are are you examining those types of
deals or just putting on your credit
expertise hat? If you see something like
that, what are you thinking?
>> Yeah. Well, it's probably helpful to
kind of talk about some of the structure
of these deals, which I think again is
made possible by how deep the private
credit markets have become. Um, and
usually when I I do that, I try to think
about how let's try to make this a
little bit more fun. So [snorts] imagine
for a minute, Joe, you just love pizza.
>> Yeah,
>> he does love pizza.
>> I do. I had it yesterday twice.
>> There you go. You're a pizza fanatic.
You decide to eat pizza. You love it so
much that you decide to eat pizza every
single meal of every single day for the
rest of your life. Like you are
committed to subsisting pizza.
>> You're committed to the carbs.
>> Exactly. So Joe, you made that decision.
You come to me and you say, "Hey Dan,
I'm going to eat pizza for every meal of
my entire life. How about you open a
pizza restaurant for me to eat it?
[laughter]
>> It'll be really lucrative. You have a
>> I see where I was wondering where you
were going with this, but this is
actually a very good analogy, right?
Like you'd have to have a lot of
confidence in me to commit to my word if
you're going to open a restaurant. I
keep going.
>> Yeah. Now, now you come to me, you say,
"This is going to be super lucrative."
>> Yeah.
>> Here's how we're going to fund it. 10%
equity. The bank is going to give you
90% of the funding in leverage. And it's
Dan's restaurant. Joe, you don't own the
restaurant, but you're going to eat at
it. I'm the full beneficiary of it.
>> Full beneficiary of the restaurant, but
it's 90% levered.
>> Okay. So, I open the restaurant, you eat
there every single day. Now, Tracy, Joe
comes to you [laughter]
for a personal loan
>> to fund his lifestyle,
>> his pizza eating.
>> Tracy trust me. She would lend it to me.
Yeah.
>> Well, here's the question, right? Should
you, Tracy, consider the 90% levered
pizza restaurant that Joe is eating at
for all his meals? Now, on the one hand,
it's not Joe's loan, right? So, he's not
on the hook if the pizza restaurant goes
under. On the other hand, it's Joe's
only source of food,
>> which is
>> Joe will die without the restaurant,
>> which is his he's committed to the
restaurant, and you know, it kind of
makes the restaurant intertwined with
Joe's ability to pay your personal loan
back. So, I guess that's the question.
>> No, this is great. So, now who's now
that let's take it out of pizza. who is
>> so that's
>> whatever like okay now who is the chips
buy or whatever
>> this is essentially what's happening
with offbalance sheet financing and data
center deals
>> so and it includes Meta's I'm sure you
saw the Hyperion deal which is Meta's AI
infrastructure deal with Blue Owl except
I think it's even more intriguing than
some of the pizza stuff so Meta and Blue
Owl basically created a joint venture in
a special purpose vehicle not that
different than the restaurant and the
deal is the joint venture would be owned
20% by Meta 80% by Blue Owl so blue owl
controls s it and it would effectively
be funded with 90% leverage. So call it
$30 billion of total enterprise value,
$3 billion of equity, $27 billion give
or take of debt. Um in other words, Blue
Owl is effectively owning the
restaurant. Meta is effectively eating
at the restaurant and the banks funded
with 90% leverage. So what this does is
it keeps the debt off of Meta's books,
right? while also giving investors,
credit managers the ability to put money
against data center asset. So Meta in
this deal will make rent payments
associated with the data center based on
its cost of power. That's the cash flow
that's going to the SPV and that
effectively funds the interest expense.
Let's just talk about the debt for a
second.
>> Yeah.
>> In a normal LBO context,
>> which you guys have probably talked
about many times here, 90% leverage is
pretty exceptionally high.
uh most people would consider 50 to 80%
leverage to be relatively normal for a
stable cash flow business. So the debt
itself is actually quite high on on some
of these structures. The only reason it
was possible was because it was given an
investment grade credit rating uh and in
part because Meta agreed to a 4-year
operating lease with what's called a
residual value guarantee which means
that Meta will is guaranteeing a capped
amount of some of that cash flow.
However, that guarantee is capped and is
only partial, which is why they don't
have to take it onto their books and why
it would be a footnote as a contingent
debt obligation in their balance sheet.
>> Um, now let's talk about the asset
that's being underwritten.
>> This isn't pizza. Pizza actually has a
stable price, right? We have thousands
of years of history on pizza, right? And
you can track that price over time. Uh,
data centers optimized for GPU
performance on training fundamental AI
models.
not so much of a mature asset.
Actually, I think most folks would think
about it as a burgeoning asset. Now, I'm
in this world. I mean, folks, there's
high amount of demand for a lot of this
compute and I I definitely think uh you
know, the demand is there, but at the
end of the day, it's an immature asset
with a price that isn't so well defined.
So just to recap, you've got offbalance
sheet financing which isn't reflected
with whoever is lending money to Meta or
even buying its equity
with 90% leverage on an immature asset.
Uh and I think that's why these deals
are so interesting. So from our point of
view, I mean to make sure you get the
terms right and you know we will look at
these data center a lot of these these
types of financings run through our
platform all the time. to make sure you
get the terms right on what this
structural protections look like in
these deals is critical for the
fortification of something um that is in
the structure. So, I know we've seen
these idiosyncratic blowups in the
private credit market so far, but just
looking at the AI market in particular
and the financing there, it feels like
right now people are still willing to
lend money. And we've talked about this
on the show before, but a lot of the AI
competition is couched in this
existential language of you either, you
know, win at AI or die basically and so
the spending keeps going. What is your
guess on like the thing that kind of
knocks that cycle or that flywheel um
and tears it apart?
>> I mean, so I'm obviously in the AI
industry. We're in the credit industry,
so we see both sides of this phenomenon.
I fundamentally believe AI is a paradigm
shift. I would not have left, you know,
the deal markets if I didn't think that.
And I think what we're witnessing is
very similar to the internet in the
1990s and or the iPhone in the 2000s or
social media in the 2010s. And I think
this paradigm shift is going to
ultimately change a ton of industries
including capital markets and finance
and law and all these amazing
industries. And um and so that I think
is very true.
Um but I also think two things can be
true. I think AI can be a generation
defining category
uh and a technology that's upending a
lot of industries but I also think that
categories will have winners and losers
>> and when folks are racing to define a
category as you know you often see with
a lot of these transformational types of
technology there may be more losers in
the headlines than you're used to seeing
in a lot of these markets
>> uh but the winners will be bigger than
anyone's ever imagined. Um,
>> all right. So, if I don't eat the pizza,
someone else is going to pick up the
pizza and they're going to they're going
to eat it.
>> Look, what we focus on in Noetica is in
a market moving this fast.
>> Yeah.
>> We all need to pay attention to the
terms that actually underpinning
>> a lot of these markets to make sure if
there is any bleeding that bleeding gets
stopped as quickly as possible. Um, you
know, just to give you one last example
from a recent market deal, you can look
at the Frank JPM deal as like a really
interesting one. This is, you know, this
was a deal where JP Morgan t paid $175
million to acquire a company. There's a
very small deal, but to acquire a
company called Frank, which is a
streamlined FAFSA kind of support
service.
>> I know I remember this. It turned out
>> there was a lot of synthetically
>> uh madeup types of data in that
business.
>> And the founder is going to prison,
right?
>> Allegedly, there's a lot of [laughter]
there's a lot of madeup uh stuff in the
business. And I think
>> seven days executive who worked at Frank
sentence to 68 months in prison. Yeah.
>> Yeah. And so, but I I think the most
interesting part about this particular
transaction to me is JPM ended up
signing a merger agreement that said
that
>> uh the indemnification for the founders
litigation for any founders litigation
would be paid for by JPM.
>> Right. They paid her lawyer.
>> They paid $15 million in legal expenses
for her lawyer on her fraud.
>> And so when you're moving really fast
>> Yeah.
>> Right. you can kind of ignore some of
the nuts and bolts. Um, but I think it's
actually even more critical in
fastmoving markets.
>> Dan Wartman, co-founder of Noetica,
thank you so much for coming on out.
>> Thank you. Thanks for having me.
>> Tracy, I wasn't really sure where he was
going with that pizza analogy, but it
actually does make a lot of sense and
it's something I think is a phenomenon
in just a lot of financial transactions,
which is how much like in certain
environments, the lender and the
creditor are like both each other's like
they're both leaning on each other.
They're both the creditor and lender.
They're relying on each other.
>> Yeah. At the same time,
>> much in the way you rely on pizza.
>> You would lend to me to buy to eat
pizza, right?
>> I would.
>> Thank you.
>> If it if it was a matter of survival.
>> Yeah. If it was a matter of survival.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
>> If it's just cuz you want to eat really
expensive pizza, then no.
>> You know, the other thing too is just
like from talking to you over these
years, you know, how many times I've
heard something, oh, there's like
there's a lot of CV light stuff going.
It is interesting to think that like you
don't often hear that quantified what
that means, right? things are like
covite these days, etc. And the idea
that like maybe we could get better
numbers on some of these things seems
like potentially labor saving for
lawyers, stuff like that.
>> The um the specific numbers on specific
deal terms were really interesting to
me. And the idea that
>> even today lawyers still lawyers and
bankers still have trouble anticipating
every single thing that [clears throat]
could happen to a particular deal. And
so they're having to react to it and
come up with the new terms, the new deal
language and insert them into the
documentation. I find that interesting.
The tariff example,
>> you know, the problem is is that AI is,
and this is I'm certain if we talked
about this more, AI will be used to come
up with new deal terms and the cat-and-
mouse game will continue forever. So I
suspect that we are not going to have
you know but lawyers will always find
new work to do and they'll just get work
they'll just get more creative about
outsmarting the systems that are
designed to detect these phenomena.
>> We will end up with thousands and
thousands of pages of term sheets that
like humans are just physically
incapable of reading. It has to be read
by AI.
>> I probably literally that is what's
going to happen.
>> Yeah. All right. Shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the OddLotss podcast.
I'm Tracy Aloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman Dash
Bennett at Dashbot and Kellbrooks at
Kalebrooks.
>> And for more oddlots content, you can
check out our daily newsletter that is
at bloomberg.com.
>> And you can join fellow listeners in
conversation about all these topics 247
in our Discord, discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like or leave a comment or
better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.